University of PittsburghDigital Access For AllNico BartelloCS 0590Professor Quirin26 November, 2023	In the landscape of rapid technological development, the term “digital divide” was created as a reminder of the disparities in access and utilization of such technology. The digital revolution has invented and restructured ways of connectivity and information access thus revealing a chasm that exists between people with seamless assimilation and those struggling to gain entry. As the world pushes forward through this age of information, it has become increasingly clear that the benefits of the digital age are not evenly distributed. Researching the digital divide requires an investigation into its multifaceted dimensions, and the consequences it imposes on society and individuals. By examining the complexities of the digital divide, the goal is not only understanding but to also underscore the urgent social and ethical implications linked to it. The digital divide is shaped by educational challenges affecting learning, technological barriers for the elderly, and worsening rural and urban disparities with digital access. In this era where digital literacy is a key piece for societal participation and progress, addressing the digital divide is a necessity for cultivating an inclusive community. 	The concept of the digital divide found its roots within the rapid evolution of technology over the past decades. The term started being used during the 1990s by researchers and policy makers, initially it meant the lack of access to computers. This would later shift to include the internet as it became more widely accessible and a necessity for computer functionality. The term “digital divide” has its own controversy from its suggestion that there is a simple unchanging divide between people with internet access and those without. Van Dijk author of a book on the digital divide argues, “the divide is more like a spectrum with on the one side people who use computers and the Internet for about every daily task and the people not using them at all at the other side” (“The Digital Divide”). The discussions surrounding the digital divide have had wavering popularity since its creation. This is evident as between 2000 and 2004 there were many scientific and policy conferences, but at the end of 2004 this began to decline (“The Digital Divide”). In 2019 the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization, UNESCO, estimated that approximately 45 percent of the world’s population lacks access to the internet. Furthermore, this is also a geographical global issue since only 40-42 percent of people in developing countries have internet access versus 70-98 percent in developed countries. 	Age provides a glimpse into the rapid innovation of technology and its varying impacts the divide has on different generations. Younger individuals that have grown up during the digital revolution tend to effortlessly integrate into the digital world, allowing them to access the benefits for education, communication, and personal growth. However, the older generations often find themselves at a disadvantage, struggling to deal with the steep learning curve and other barriers that limit their access. The COVID-19 pandemic illuminated the impact that the divide had on the elderly as the forced shift to online platforms for work, education and healthcare left many out. A study was taken prior to and after the beginning of the pandemic on older adults which reported an increase of depression and greater loneliness (MacLeod et al.). Another study stated, “Nearly 1 in 4 adults aged 65 and over are considered socially isolated, and nearly 1 out of 3 adults over 45 feel lonely” (Nash). This divide the elderly are forced to combat isn’t just a risk to their mental health as social isolation increases the chance of premature death to rates that smoking, obesity and inactivity have. In elderly with access to digital resources they have shown an improvement on mental health, feelings of independence, and reduced social isolation and depression (“How Can Closing the Digital Divide”). While the progress made with digital technology is undeniably remarkable it should not overshadow the importance of ensuring the elderly are included. 	The digital divide between rural and urban areas poses a multitude of challenges for accessing digital technologies and resources. The Pew Research Center data from 2021 shows that around three-in-ten rural Americans lack access to broadband internet at home, and four-in-ten lack high-speed broadband access. Reports stemming from 1998 display a consistent 6-9 percentage point gap between urban and rural community’s internet use over time (Hill). The most prominent cause for this gap is the coverage, affordability, and digital literacy rural areas are faced with in comparison to their urban counterparts. This limitation introduces significant obstacles for many to participate in the digital age. According to the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, NITA, 18 percent of the estimated 24 million offline households reported broadband service was too expensive for them to adopt it (Hill). In contrast urban areas benefit from an extensive digital infrastructure which contributes to their higher rates of digital literacy. This lack of access can affect many different aspects of an individual, especially for people seeking a job. Another study showed, “Americans who have actually looked for a new job […] fully 90% of these recent job seekers have ever used the internet to research jobs, and 84% have applied to a job online” (Smith). Closing the rural-urban digital divide is essential for providing equal opportunities and reducing social economic disparities in the digital landscape. Expanding broadband infrastructure and digital literacy in rural areas can provide a path for a more inclusive and digitally advanced society. 	The digital divide has deep implications for education, introducing disparities in access and opportunities among students. It is reported that around 1.3 billion children between the ages of three and seventeen lack internet access at home, this is concerning as it is nearly two-thirds of the worlds school aged population (Kloza). Technology provides many benefits to students both in and outside of the classroom. It allows for increased student engagement, inclusion, automation, and future proofing for the student. Including technology in the school curriculum allows for practical exposure to digital tools starting from a young age, which in turn creates a generation with more digital literacy and accessible resources. One the other hand, its absence inhibits a student’s long-term success and perpetuates the digital divide by causing more challenges in their education which often leads to them dropping out. Education was one of the predominantly affected areas from the pandemic which amplified many existing educational disparities. Around one-in-five parents reported that their children lacked access to a computer which stopped them from completing their schoolwork, and three-in-ten stated they would have to work from a cell phone (Lake and Makori).  Completing assignments on smartphones poses additional challenges, as outdated learning software frequently performs poorly on smaller screens. When a student missed 10 percent or more of their school days within a year it is called a chronic absence, which was intensified by the digital divide and pandemic. Schools that previously reported a 14 percent extreme chronic absence rates jumped to 43 percent during the pandemic (“Chronic Absenteeism”). This leads to students struggling to complete homework, falling behind, receiving lower grades, and sometimes prevents them from graduating. Closing the educational digital divide is imperative to ensuring that students, regardless of their background, can benefit from digital learning opportunities. 	Implementing extensive solutions to bridge the digital divide in requires a combination of both short-term interventions and long-term structural changes. There have been a few steps forward over the previous decades towards reducing the divide. There are some policies such as the Emergency Connectivity Fund (ECF), Affordable Connectivity Fund (ACF), and E-Rate that aim to reduce the gap. The ECF and E-Rate provides funding and discounts to schools and libraries to upgrade and implement technology; The ACF supports low-income households struggling to afford internet (Tarman 1). A few private companies have also made efforts such as T-Mobile’s “Project 10 Million”, which provided free and discounted internet to students with no fees or costs (“Free Internet for Students”). These policies and projects have made progress towards reducing the digital divide but are unable to solve it all together. Digital literacy programs are also great options to increase inclusivity with technology such as the United Nations program. It focuses on improving digital learning and skills of children and youth, but such programs could also be used for educating the elderly or anyone that’s digitally illiterate. The government plays a pivotal role in addressing the digital divide through policies, allocating funding, and providing private companies with incentives. 	In conclusion, the digital divide remains a critical challenge that emphasizes the disparities in access and utilization of technology among different demographics. From its initial recognition the digital divide has consistently affected education, the economy, and society. Navigating the complexities of the digital divide makes it evident that more awareness and multiple solutions are imperative for reducing the gap. Initiatives that handle broadband infrastructure, affordability, digital literacy, and education disparities with technology are vital in creating an equal opportunity society. The COVID-19 pandemic emphasized and reminded society of the urgency required to bridge these divides especially for the vulnerable such as elderly and students. By embracing comprehensive initiatives and collective efforts society can ensure progress towards a future where the benefits of the digital age are accessible to all, promoting an inclusive society.Work Cited“Chronic Absenteeism and Disrupted Learning Require an All-Hands-On-Deck Approach | CEA.” The White House, 13 Sept. 2023, www.whitehouse.gov/cea/written-materials/2023/09/13/chronic-absenteeism-and-disrupted-learning-require-an-all-hands-on-deck-approach/#:~:text=In%20the%20aftermath%20of%20the.“Free Internet for Students: Project 10Million | T-Mobile.” Www.t-Mobile.com, www.t-mobile.com/brand/project-10-million.Hill, Kelly. “The Digital Divide: Rural vs. Urban.” RCR Wireless News, 20 Feb. 2023, www.rcrwireless.com/20230220/network-infrastructure/the-digital-divide-rural-vs-urban.“How Can Closing the Digital Divide Improve Older People’s Lives?” University of Plymouth, www.plymouth.ac.uk/discover/how-can-breaking-the-digital-divide-improve-the-health-and-wellbeing-of-older-people.Kloza, Brad. “Solutions to the Digital Divide: Moving toward a More Equitable Future.” Connecting the Unconnected, 3 Feb. 2023, ctu.ieee.org/solutions-to-the-digital-divide-moving-toward-a-more-equitable-future/.Lake, Robin, and Alvin Makori. “The Digital Divide among Students during COVID-19: Who Has Access? Who Doesn’t?” Center on Reinventing Public Education, 16 June 2020, crpe.org/the-digital-divide-among-students-during-covid-19-who-has-access-who-doesnt/.MacLeod, Stephanie, et al. “COVID-19 Era Social Isolation among Older Adults.” Geriatrics, vol. 6, no. 2, May 2021, p. 52, https://doi.org/10.3390/geriatrics6020052.Nash, Susan. “The Pandemic Has Accelerated the Need to Close the Digital Divide for Older Adults.” Stanford Center on Longevity, 4 June 2020, longevity.stanford.edu/the-pandemic-has-accelerated-the-need-to-close-the-digital-divide-for-older-adults/.Smith, Aaron. “1. The Internet and Job Seeking.” Pew Research Center: Internet, Science & Tech, 19 Nov. 2015, www.pewresearch.org/internet/2015/11/19/1-the-internet-and-job-seeking/#:~:text=Digital%20resources%20are%20now%20more. Accessed 27 Nov. 2023.Tarman, Bulent. THE DIGITAL DIVIDE in EDUCATION 1. files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED508213.pdf.“The Digital Divide - an Introduction.” Universiteit Twente, www.utwente.nl/en/centrefordigitalinclusion/Blog/02-Digitale_Kloof/#:~:text=During%20the%201990s%2C%20researchers%20and. Accessed 26 Nov. 2023.Vogels, Emily A. “Some Digital Divides Persist between Rural, Urban and Suburban America.” Pew Research Center, www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2021/08/19/some-digital-divides-persist-between-rural-urban-and-suburban-america/#:~:text=Roughly%20seven%2Din%2Dten%20rural.1Bartello